All right.
So moving along, there are some other character classes that we can learn, so we just learned about
the square bracket character class, OK?
There are lots of other character classes and shorthand that shorthand symbols we can use to specify
our regular expressions or our patterns.
OK.
So another one that you'll use probably quite often.
Let's say that we want to allow a three letter word.
And we don't care what the letters are, but we just want to specify that we want to allow for a word
that has three Latin letters.
OK, and I'm going to specify specifically Latin letters, OK?
Or word characters, even, OK?
Characters that would typically be in a word.
OK.
Well, there's a symbol for that that we can use, which is backslash W, and that's the backslash lowercase
W and that stands for word character.
Now you'll notice, though, that as I have this backslash w here, I've got a squiggly line.
And if I hover over that, the ad is telling me that there's an illegal escape character in string literal.
And the problem here is that Java doesn't like by default that I've got this backslash here.
That backslash has special meaning in Java.
And so if I want to use that, which I need to, because that's what I need for the regular expression
itself, I'm going to have to do what is called escaping that backslash.
And the way I do that in Java is to simply use one more backslash.
OK.
And the reason I call this out is because if you go Google for more reading on regular expressions.
First off, let me back up and just explain.
So regular expressions are not something that is specific to the Java programming language.
Regular expressions have existed for decades, and they transcend any particular programming language.
And in fact, I would venture to say most modern programming languages these days have some support
for regular expressions, but they will all utilize them slightly differently.
So if you go Google for how to do various things with regular expressions or rejects, you will likely
find examples where they are showing expressions that just use single back slashes unless those examples
are specifically geared towards Java.
And so you'll need to know that if you do find expressions on the internet that look like this with
one single backslash, you'll need to put a second backslash.
You'll need to escape those if you're going to paste them into Java code.
OK?
So just like that?
All right.
So now what we are saying is this pattern should match any string that contains one word character,
followed by lowercase a lowercase T.
OK.
So if I run this now?
That matches because L is one word character.
OK.
So any Latin character or letter is going to match in this position now plus underscore also the regular
expression standard allows for an underscore to be treated essentially as a letter.
I don't know why, but whoever came up with this decided that underscores should, should, should match
that as well.
But hyphen, if we use a hyphen here, that does not work because hyphen is not considered to be a word
character.
Also, within the range of word characters are numbers.
OK, so I could put a single digit in here as well.
And that's fine.
Now again, I cannot use a two or three digit number or anything like that, because now my string is
four characters long, whereas my regular expression is only expecting a string of three characters
here.
OK, so that won't work.
All right, now, I can use this shorthand for word character multiple times as well.
So I could get rid of the A and T and I could just do.
Right.
So now I'm saying match on any string that is three word characters long.
Right?
So that, of course, will match.
And because the underscore is considered a word character, I could have three underscores.
Right.
And of course, I can have any combination.
OK.
So I think you get the you get the idea.
So there are a number of these shorthand character classes that we can use besides just one four word
characters.
There's something that represents numbers or digits as well, and that is slash the backslash D.
OK.
So same basic idea.
So if I do a one here or yeah, and I run this.
That matches, but if I do a z here.
That does not match.
Now you may be scratching your head and let me just make it clear word characters do allow for letters,
numbers and underscore.
But digit or no character class only allows for numbers.
OK, so there is a little bit of overlap there.
Just want to be clear on that?
OK, so then we could have multiples of these.
Like so and that will that should match.
And then, of course, if we substitute out one of those for a letter.
Now, we don't have a match anymore.
OK.
So I think that's hopefully making good sense to you.
We're still in the pretty simple examples here.
Don't worry, though, it's going to start ratcheting up a little bit.
OK, so now let's say we wanted to match a phone number, right?
And that's one of the examples where we're heading towards anyway.
So let's say we had a phone number like three to one hyphen three three three seven six five two.
OK.
All right.
So obviously, this should not match because our expression is only calling for three digits and now
we've got was that 10 digits plus a couple of hyphens as well.
Right.
So how can we match this?
I'd like you to take a moment to see if you can figure out how to make an expression that would match
this phone number and get back with you in just a second.
OK, so the simplest thing we could probably do is a combination of the digit shorthand plus a string
literal, so I'm going to literally put a hyphen there, followed by the right and then another hyphen
and then four more of these three.
Four.
Let's see if that matches.
Yes, it does.
OK.
So, yeah, so kind of, you know, it's a little it's a little verbose, but it's very clear as to
what we're trying to do here, right?
Match three numbers followed by a hyphen, followed by three more numbers by a hyphen, followed by
four numbers.
And that's exactly what we have here.
And so that matches perfectly well.
OK, so now what if we're lazy and we don't we don't want to have to keep repeating a million shades
or double use or whatever, right?
Well, we can also use something called a quantifier in regular expressions so that we can quantify
how many times we want a particular pattern or expression or character class to match.
And so instead of having to explicitly write out all of these D's here, we could do this.
Instead, we can get rid of the duplicates there and we can use the curly brace and then the number
of times we want that match to happen.
So in this case, we expect three digits there and then C, we'll get rid of these in three digits there
and then we want four of those.
And so now if we run this again.
We get true.
All right, so now we're telling the regular expression engine to match on any string that contains
a pattern of three digits, followed by a hyphen followed by three digits, followed by a hyphen, followed
by four digits.
And that's exactly the pattern that we have here.
And we can test this out a little bit more, let's put it like the.
I don't know what that is even called the long distance thingy right in North America.
So if we try this pattern, we get a false because obviously our regular expression is not expecting
us to have a leading single digit, followed by a hyphen.
So it's not allowing for that particular pattern at this time.
Right?
So again, pretty, I think, pretty straightforward, right?
And now we saved ourselves a little bit of hyping as well with all those duplicated ads all over the
place.
OK, now what if we also wanted to meet me?
Let me put this back the way it was.
Now what if we also wanted to allow for?
I don't know, not just hyphens, but let's say periods.
Right.
Sometimes you see phone numbers entered in that way.
So if we wanted to allow that?
Well, let's first try this out.
OK, so that does not match anymore, because we have periods here in our expression is expecting hyphens
where those periods are.
What if we wanted to allow either write the hyphens or periods?
Can you think of how to do that with what we've learned so far?
I'm going to give you a few moments.
OK, so well, we did learn at the beginning of the lesson a way that we could test for one character
or another character, right?
Do you remember what that was?
That was the square bracket character class, right?
So we had these square brackets just like this, and I'm going to go and just put these in place first
before I completely solve this, right?
So we'll start off with that.
OK.
So what we can do here is we can tell it.
We want to match at this location in the string, a hyphen or a period just like this, and I'm going
to put one here as well, right?
Because whatever is inside of these square brackets by default has the implication of matching whatever
character or the other character or characters within the square brackets.
So you're implying or right?
Either or rather.
All right.
And so now if we run this.
We get a match for these periods, and then if we change these periods back to hyphens and run that.
That works also, right?
So either of those and then let's try a negative case, though let's do common.
Let's run that.
False.
So, yeah, it's not allowing us to use commas there, only hyphen or period now, of course, if we
wanted to use to be to allow for commas as well, we could just add that in as well, right?
We could put that in here and now run this.
Bam, and now we've got commas, and then you could mix and match as well, so I can have a hyphen in
the first place in a common the second place and this should work.
Right, because there's two of these bracketed expressions here, so either any of those characters
within the bracket expressions for either of these expressions is fine.
Right?
So any combination of those?
All right.
In fact, now there's one more scenario.
Sometimes you might maybe even see phone numbers with just spaces.
Maybe I don't know, especially like in some foreign countries, perhaps where they just have a slightly
different standard for how they specify their phone numbers.
So what if we wanted to allow for a space, right?
How could we do that?
Well.
You could try this where you just put a space in here.
Let's let's see what happens when we do that.
OK, so it seems to be OK with that, right?
However, I'm going to just tell you now that's probably not the greatest way to do this, because it's
a little difficult to see visually that one of the characters that you're allowing for is just a space.
And so in regular expression engines, there is a shorthand that actually means a space character.
And can you guess what that might be?
So word characters are w digit characters or.
What do you think a space character will be?
OK, so if you guessed backslash, yes, you would be correct.
And so we can be a little more explicit here and put a backslash, yes, although because we're in Java,
we have to use two back slashes, right?
And then we run this again.
All right, cool.
So that still works, so now we can allow for commas and spaces and hyphens and periods.
Right.
And so maybe now you're beginning to get a deeper sense of the power of regular expressions.
It is in their ability to be highly flexible and yet still constrain what you are allowed to match on
or to to check against with text.
Right?
OK, so now what if we have an arbitrary number of spaces separating these sections?
So what if you know, by accident, somebody typed a few too many spaces in here?
So if we run this?
Now we get a false and the reason is because we're only expecting up to one space or period or a comma
or hyphen in these places here, right?
Only one that we are expecting.
So what if we wanted to allow for the possibility that you could have multiple of those in here?
And mostly I'm referring to spaces.
But whatever whatever you want it to be.
Well, for that scenario, we have another type of quantifier that we can use.
We have another set of quanta fires that we could use.
So if you want to allow for the possibility of one or more spaces, one way that we could do that is
right outside of our square bracket, just as we were putting these curly braces and then a number here
right outside of the square bracket, if we want to allow for one or more of the things that are inside
of the square brackets.
We can do a plus symbol here, so that means one or more of the character class that is in front of
that plus symbol in this case, just as this means three of whatever is in front of it.
So in this case, three digits.
So here we're saying one or more.
Of any of those characters that are in this square bracket here.
OK.
And so we can put another one here.
Now I understand this is starting to look a little difficult to read, and that is one major downside
to regular expressions.
And probably one of the reasons why a lot of programmers, especially more junior to intermediate programmers,
may tend to be somewhat intimidated by their use.
They're really great at encoding a whole lot of rules of how you want to match things very concisely,
but they can quickly turn into something that isn't real easy to read and decode for a human.
And part of the reason for that is because the conciseness of of a regular expression is a language
in and of itself.
This is a computer language, really, and one might argue it's intended to be a little easier to be
read by the computer than by humans.
But, you know, take your time and just kind of pass it through, and hopefully you can understand
what you're seeing, especially if you're the one making it.
All right.
So now that we've got this plus here, let's run this again.
And now we get a true.
So now, as long as I have one or more of any of these characters in either of these places, it's always
going to match.
I'll put one.
I'll go back down to one and run this again.
OK.
However, what if I don't have a space there?
All right, because sometimes people will enter a phone number with no spaces at all.
And now I'm getting a false.
So what if I want to allow for the possibility of zero of these dividing characters, including a space
or as many as you want?
What if I want that zero or more?
Well, there's a character that represents zero or more also, so the plus means one or more.
But if I want zero or more, I can use an asterisk.
OK, so that's what that's what you can use for that situation and asterisk.
So that means zero or more of the characters proceeding.
So now in this case, I have three digits, three, two, one, followed by zero of any of these things
here, right?
Followed by three more digits, followed by zero spaces or hyphens or commas, followed by four digits.
So if I run this.
That matches.
However, if I put one space in here and run it.
That also matches.
OK, and then if I put a bunch of spaces on the on the in between the three and the four digits and
run that.
That also matches.
OK, so again, you're starting to see the real power and flexibility of of regular expressions, right?
You can just do so much with them.
And just to be clear here, let's put, I don't know, let's put a z here and try that.
That's false, right, because, yeah, Z.
Is not zero or more of a hyphen period comma or space, right, so so the regular expression engine
is smart enough to understand.
Nope, that's not matching the pattern that you have specified here.
OK.
So get rid of that Z, and I'll put a space back in there.
And also, let's just go back to a more traditional pattern.
Just make sure that still works.
Yes.
So hyphens still work.
And while we're at it, there's at least one more common pattern for quanta fires that you may want
to use.
What if we only want to allow for zero or one of these dividing characters?
So not multiple, just zero or one?
There's a special character for that situation as well.
So we've learned that plus symbol allows for one or more asterisk.
Symbol allows for zero or more.
And now we want zero or just one.
OK.
So you can have one or you can have none, but you can't have more than one.
For that, you'll use question mark.
Some putting the question mark in there, and I will run this now.
So this will work.
Right.
And I can have nothing here, that's zero.
And I'll run it.
And that will work, but I can't have one to two spaces.
That doesn't work because it's two spaces now if I have one space.
That's fine.
OK, so a question mark means zero matches or one match, but not more than one.
OK.
Also, one other thing I want to show with these numerical quantify errors is you can put some more
inputs in here.
So in this particular case, we're saying we want to allow for three digit numbers.
What if you're in a country where and I don't know if this is even a thing, some kind of contriving
this.
Let's say you're in a country where this last bit here could be three or four digits long.
Either one would be acceptable.
OK, how could we do that?
Now, this curly brace quantifier format here can allow for some additional things.
So what we can do is we can tell at a minimum and a maximum range, OK?
Right now we're telling it an exact range.
We just want exactly four digits, but we could tell it.
We want between three to four digits.
And the way to do that is just to start with the minimal minimum, which is three and then a comma there.
OK, and now we're saying we will allow for three to four digits here on this last match.
OK, so first we'll run this and just make sure this is still working.
OK, so we still get a match there, that's true.
But now if we reduce this down to three digits and run this.
That also works, right?
But if we make it five digits.
That no longer matches.
Right?
That's too many.
Right.
So it has to be between three and four, according to our regular expression here.
All right.
And then likewise, if we only have two digits.
That also does not match.
OK, now I'm going to put this back.
Two four digits for a typical North American phone number.
Like so, but I just wanted to show that you can have.
Oh, and we can also say things like you could just specify one or the other as well.
So you could say I want to allow for a minimum of three digits with no upper limit, so I can put this
comma here and not specify that second number.
So this is saying it has to be at least three digits long.
But there's no upper limit to how long it can be.
OK, so now if I run this?
This is true.
And if I put this many digits here.
This also works now, OK?
But if I only have to.
Digits here.
That does not match because I said here I want a minimum of three digits on this last little bit here.
OK.
Just this last bit.
Now I can put that anywhere, by the way, but I have these three groupings of digits here.
File are separated by spaces or hyphens or periods, commas, whatever, right?
So I'm only dealing with this last little bit here.
So I'm saying that that has to be at least three digits long.
All right.
And I think for one of the last things that we're going to go through in this particular lesson, which
will set us up for the next lesson, by the way, there's one more thing here that you may want to know,
and that is notice here in our phone number pattern.
We allow three digits, followed by some separator, followed by three digits, followed by some separator,
followed by four digits.
So in other words, we're we're using the same pattern twice here.
What if we don't want to have to specify here three digits followed by all of this zero or zero or one?
And then do all of that again, right?
What if we want to kind of be a little bit lazier here?
Well, we could get rid of all of this.
The second pattern here, right, which is a duplication of the first pattern.
One hundred percent duplication, right?
So we could get rid of this.
And what we could do is to group all of this.
And the way to do that, we could just put a parentheses here.
Let me start at the beginning of it, though, so I'm going to put an opening parentheses here and then
I'm going to go to the end of this pattern.
And I'm going to put a closing parentheses right there, so now I'm I'm grouping.
All of that right there.
These digits, plus whatever separator there is going to be there as well, right?
I'm grouping all of that.
And now I can put a quantifier on the end of this grouping to simply say, let me match that two times.
So right, here is the end of this grouping.
And now I can put a quantifier and say to.
Just like that.
So now I'm saying matched this pattern, this type of pattern three digits, followed by a separator
of a hyphen period comma or space two times, which is what I have here three digits and a space followed
by three digits and a space, right?
So I have that pattern two times.
So I can just make that pattern one time here in the expression in the rejects and then say match that
two times or however many times, right?
And so now if I run this.
I get a match right that that works.
Now, if I get rid of that pattern and only have have it one time and run this.
Now, that's not matching anymore.
Now let's say I want to allow for this because in North America, this is a legitimate phone number
for a local number, right, just seven digits.
So if I wanted to allow for either of those scenarios, what could I do?
OK, so I could say that I want to allow up to two matches of that pattern, and the way I can do that
is to simply say one comma two just like that, right?
So now I'm saying I will allow to match this pattern once or twice.
So now if I run this?
I get a true.
And then if I.
Do this.
That also works right?
And then I can still come back in here, and I haven't used the period in a while, so we'll do the
period version of this.
Right.
So all of these scenarios work now.
And just I don't know, I just kind of for grins.
I want to go back one more time to the seven digit version.
Yep.
So that that works to undo that.
All right.
So I know again, I know these expressions can start to look really unwieldy and you really need to
pay attention.
So what I like to do is just kind of start at the beginning and go slowly so I can see there that I've
got OK.
Digits, three digits.
So then I come over here and say, OK, there's my three digits, followed by either a hyphen, a period,
a comma or a space.
And I've got a period here, so I know that that matched and I'm looking for zero or one of whatever
that was right.
And I've got one here.
And then this whole entire pattern matched once or twice.
And so here it is again.
Followed by.
Four digits.
And that's what I've got here.
OK.
And so that's how you can kind of read these expressions and break them down into smaller, bite sized
pieces.
All right.
So now I want to give you one more tiny challenge.
How could you make an expression that would accept?
One more number in front, again, if you're familiar with North American phone numbers.
Typically, you'd actually have to dial one and then the rest of the digits, right?
So how could you make an expression that would allow for this?
Take a moment?
OK, so really, you can pretty much just use what we already have here.
Right.
In fact, I think I will exactly do that.
I'll start off by just copying this and then I'll go right in front of here and paste.
And the only thing that I'm going to do differently is that I don't want three digits here.
I'm only expecting one digit.
So for that, I could I certainly could just put a one here, but I don't even need that because that's
implied if you just have one thing right there, right?
One digit, right?
And so now this is going to match.
There you go.
Right now, if we wanted this leading bit here, the one in the period or whatever to be optional,
can you think of how to do that?
Go ahead and try.
All right, so if I wanted to make that first bit the one in the period or one in a separate or character
optional, I would probably go ahead and group that all first.
And then I could say allow for zero or one of that with a question mark just like this.
So now if I run this.
That works.
But if I get rid of this and run it.
That also works.
So isn't that pretty cool?
So either of those scenarios will work now, and I know this looks a little weird because you got the
question mark and then a closing parentheses and then another question mark.
So remember this this question mark here is for this bracket expression saying zero or more of a hyphen
period comma or a space.
This question mark is for this entire grouping of the one one digit, followed by period or a hyphen
or whatever.
OK.
And by the way, so in North America, I guess the rule really is that that leading thing there can
only be a one.
I think I can't think of any example where I've ever not seen it be a one.
So you could constrain this further instead of being generic and allowing because here the way this
is written now, not only is this valid, that would be valid too, and I've never seen a North American
phone number like this.
I think they're always starting with a one.
So you could be even more technical here, technically correct and get rid of that cigarette and just
put a literal of a one here saying, I'm only going to allow a one.
If you're going to do this at all, it has to be a one.
You don't have to have anything there.
But if you do put something there in front of the 10 digits, it has to be a one, right?
So if we run this?
Yet we get a true.
But if we do a four year.
That's a false.
But if we get rid of it completely, that's OK.
There you go.
Isn't that powerful?
That's incredibly powerful to do all of this with without using regular expressions, just with regular
code would be quite a bit of work.
So anyway, let's go ahead and wrap this up, and in the next lesson, we'll we'll do a whole lot more
with regular expressions I'll see in the next one.